Getting and Cleaning Data: Course Project
=========================================

Introduction
------------
This repository contains my work for the course project for the Coursera course "Getting and Cleaning data", part of the Data Science specialization.

Project Description
-------------------
The purpose of this project is to demonstrate your ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be used for later analysis. You will be graded by your peers on a series of yes/no questions related to the project. 

You will be required to submit:

1. a tidy data set as described below, 
2. a link to a Github repository with your script for performing the analysis, 
3. a code book that describes the variables, the data, and any transformations or work that you performed to clean up the data called     CodeBook.md. You should also include a README.md in the repo with your scripts. This repo explains how all of the scripts work and how they are connected.
      
One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing see
for example
this article (http://www.insideactivitytracking.com/datascienceactivitytrackingandthebattlefortheworldstopsportsbrand/).
Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most
advanced algorithms to attract new users. The data linked to from the course website represent data
collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A full description is available
at the site where the data was obtained:

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones

Here are the data for the project:

https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip

You should create one R script called run_analysis.R that does the following.
1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement.
3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each
variable for each activity and each subject.

Files In Repository
-------------------

The following files can be found in this Github repository

- **CodeBook.md**:      information about raw and tidy data set and steps made to transform them
- **README.md**:        this file
- **run_analysis.R**:   R script to transform raw data set into a tidy data set
- **tidy_dataset.txt**: The tidy data set generated by the run_analysis.R script
- **names.md**:         The markdown file generated by the run_analysis.R script for displaying a table of all the new and old names of every variable in the data set and description of each selected variable in the tidy data set

About The Raw Data
------------------

The Raw Data is split into 2 separate sets of data, one set for testing and the other set for training

The features (561 of them) are unlabeled and can be found in the x_test.txt. 
The activity labels are in the y_test.txt file.
The test subjects are in the subject_test.txt file.

The same holds for the training set.

The features (561 of them) are unlabeled and can be found in the x_train.txt. 
The activity labels are in the y_train.txt file.
The test subjects are in the subject_train.txt file.

About The Script And The Tidy Dataset
-------------------------------------

I created a script called run_analysis.R which will merge the test and training sets together.
Prerequisites for this script:

1. the UCI HAR Dataset must be extracted and..
2. the UCI HAR Dataset must be availble in a directory called "UCI HAR Dataset"

After merging testing and training, labels are added and only columns that have to do with mean and standard deviation are kept.

Lastly, the script will create a tidy data set containing the means of all the columns per test subject and per activity.
This tidy dataset will be written to a tab-delimited file called tidy_dataset.txt, which can also be found in this repository.

The script will also generate a names.md markdown file that displays a table of all the old and new names of every variable in the data set and description of each selected variable in the tidy data set

About The Code Book
-------------------

The CodeBook.md file explains the transformations performed and the resulting data and variables found in the tidy_dataset.txt.

Steps Taken To Create The Tidy Data set
---------------------------------------

1. Clone this repository: git clone git@github.com:ngsteve73/Coursera_Getting_and_Cleaning_Data_PEER_Assessment.git
2. Download compressed raw data
3. Unzip raw data and copy the directory UCI HAR Dataset to the cloned repository root directory
4. Open a R console and set the working directory to the repository root (use setwd())
5. Run the source run_analysis.R script (it requires the plyr package): source('run_analysis.R')
6. In the repository root directory you find the file tidy_dataset.txt with the tidy data set.





